<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Minutes, April, 1998 Los Angeles IETF WEBDAV Working Group Meeting</title>
  </head>

  <body>
<CENTER>
<h2>MINUTES</h2>
<h2>IETF WEBDAV Working Group Meeting</h2>
<h3>Los Angeles, CA IETF<BR>April 2, 1998</h3>      
</center>

<P>A WEBDAV WG meeting was held at the Los Angeles IETF, on April 2,
1998, with approximately 45 people in attendance.  Jim Whitehead
chaired the meeting, Rohit Khare, Del Jensen, and Jim Davis were
notetakers. Final minutes were prepared by Jim Whitehead from these
notes. The meeting began with a review of the agenda, followed by a
presentation on WG status by Jim Whitehead. The WEBDAV Distributed
Authoring Protocol document will be revised based on comments from the
second working group last call, producing revision -08, and will be
sent to the IESG for Last Call and review as soon as the -08 draft is
in the Internet-Drafts directory. A WEBDAV interim working group
meeting will take place June 15-17, 1998, in Redmond, WA, to discuss
advanced collections functionality, versioning, and access
control. Many thanks to Yaron Goland and Microsoft for hosting this
meeting.

<P>Following the WG status report, Keith Swenson,
&lt;<A HREF="mailto:kswenson@netscape.com">kswenson@netscape.com</A>&gt;,
&lt;URL:<A HREF="http://people.netscape.com/kswenson/http_workflow">
http://people.netscape.com/kswenson/http_workflow</A>&gt;, gave a brief
presentation on an HTTP-based workflow standardization effort that is
just starting up. The purpose of this effort is develop an
interoperability protocol for invoking and controlling an asynchronous
process via HTTP. Elements of the protocol include simple process
control (e.g., start, pause, resume), and the ability to start
external systems, such as a backup process. A key element of the
proposal is that it doesn't have to hold open a connection, since the
initial design idea is to start a process, receiving in return an
identifier URL for the process, which can then be used in subsequent
operations. There will be an initial open meeting for interested
participants on May 4, 5, 1998, in Costa Mesa, California. The group's
initial goal is to release a preliminary specification in six months.

<P>After Keith's presentation, the question was asked, "How is this
different from telnet?" The reply was this protocol does not require
an open connection, and isn't intended to be a login-based
protocol. The siimilarity between this work and IPP was noted, since
IPP also uses HTTP, and isn't login-based.  Following this question,
there was brief discussion on the similarity between the notifications
being discussed in IPP, PIPR, and the notifications being discussed
for workflow support.

<P>Jim Davis next led a discussion of the advanced collections
requirements document, and this discussion lasted for the remainder of
the session. The goals of the discussion were to generate shared
understanding, and hopefully consensus on the requirements (goals),
but not to do any design work. The presentation began with a review of
terminology, then launched into a step by step overview of each
requirement in the advanced collections requirements draft,
draft-ietf-webdav-acreq-01.txt. The notes below are organized by
requirement number.

<P>A few questions were asked during the discussion which don't neatly
fit underneath an existing requirement.  These are:

<UL>
<LI>Can one have a reference to a reference?
<LI>Can a reference have more than one target (e.g., this might be
useful in the context of content negotiation)?
</UL>

<P>Requirements-related discussion and outcome.  Agreement represents
the rough consensus of the attendees at the meeting, and this
consensus is provisional pending discussion on the mailing list.

<P><B>Requirements for Referential Collection Members:</B>

<P>3.1.1 The same resource may be referenced by referential members of
multiple collections.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.2 The same resource may be referenced by more than one referential
member of the same collection.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.3 It is possible for the same resource to be an internal member of
a collection and also to be referenced by one or more referential
members of that same collection.

<P>Agreed.

<P>Requirement 3.1.3 sparked a discussion on circular
references. Specifically, should WebDAV allow, disallow, or be silent
about circular references? It was noted that a reference can point to
any other resource, including a collection. Early WebDAV drafts do
exempt servers from having to detect circular refereces.

<P>3.1.4 Operations on a referential member do not affect the resource
it references.

<P>Agreed.

<P>Discussion of 3.1.4 led to one suggested new requirement:

<P>N.1 Operations on a target do not affect the reference(s)

<P>No consensus was recorded on this new requirement.

<P>Requirement 3.1.4 also led to a discussion of preserving
referential integrity of references. Participants asked whether
deleting a referenced resource would result in deletion of the
reference.  Similarly for a move, would the reference be updated if
its destination were moved? It was noted that in the general case,
where the referred-to resource is on a different server, maintaining
referential integrity is impossible. However, some participants
expressed a desire for a reference whose integrity would be
guaranteed, even if that meant the server would limit the potential
destinations of the reference.  The two kinds of references were
called "strong" (integrity-enforced) and "weak" (no integrity
enforcement).

<P>3.1.5 For any referential member of a collection, it is possible to
obtain the URI of the resource it references.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.6 It is possible to add a referential member to a collection.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.7 It is possible to remove a referential member from a collection.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.8 It is possible for a referential member of a collection to
carry its own properties, distinct from those of the resource it
refers to.

<P>An example of this is the author, or "who added" property.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.9 A referential member of a collection also inherits the
properties of the resource it refers to.

<P>There was wide opposition to this, on the following grounds:

<OL>
<LI>Assuming that the properties are copied when the reference is
created, it is unclear what access rights to use when doing the
PROPFIND.  Documents and references have different access rights, 
and sometimes one is wider than the other.

<LI>After the properties are copied, the owner of the target resource
no longer has means to control access on the properties.

<LI>ACAP has had problems with 'inheritance'.

<LI>Referential members are like symbolic links.  But symbolic links
do not in general have the 'properties' of their target.  Their
owner, size, and date modified all differ.
<BR>
<BR>
In addition:<BR>
<BR>
<LI>If the properties are copied, they could be become out of date
afterwards. In particular, one participant vehemently complained
that inherit-by-lookup is out since it requires one server to 
track another.
</OL>

<P>Another participant raised the question: isn't this easily
excisable -- since no other requirements build up on it, the minimum
set of requirements could exclude it safely.

<P>3.1.10 A listing of the members of a collection shows both the
internal members and the referential members.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.1.11 Servers are encouraged to maintain referential integrity for
referential members as far as possible, but are not required to do so.

<P>No agreement.  This requirement led to a re-opening of the
integrity issues of 3.1.4. One participant noted that this requirement
is like a "should" maintain integrity, but isn't should too weak to be
useful? Some applications really care whether referential integrity
will be maintained. The issue of cross-server integrity maintenance
was raised, and what this implies for the scope of integrity
maintenance. The discussion led to the following requirement:

<P>N.2 It is possible to request creation of a referential member that
the server will guarentee to have referentially integrity.

<P>Some ideas on how this might be implemented were raised during the
discussion, and include using a header to inform the server to create
the reference only if it could guarantee the integrity. A property can
be used to query the integrity maintenance capabilities of the
reference.

<P>There was agreement on this new requirement.

<P>N.3 It is possible to discover whether or not a referential member
has such 'integrity protection'.

<P>Proposed, but no agreement reached.  Needs discussion.

<P>N.4 Is is possible to discover whether a resource is the target of
such a 'protected referential member'.

<P>Proposed, but no agreement reached.  Needs discussion.

<P>3.1.12 For any member of a collection, it is possible to discover
whether it is an internal or a referential member.

<P>Agreed.

<P><B>Requirements for Ordered Collections:</B>

<P>3.2.1 The ordering mechanism is sufficiently standardized that
different applications and servers can operate on the same ordering
without private agreement.

<P>Agreed, with change in wording: "Ordering is sufficiently
standardized..." (i.e., remove "the" and "mechanism"), due to concern
over the word 'mechanism', and its precise meaning and implications.

<P>3.2.2 The semantics of an ordering are discoverable.

<P>Agreed, but only after much discussion. There was general concern
over the meaning of "ordering semantics", since it can be read pretty
broadly. There was discussion of proposals to replace "semantics" with
"operational characteristics" or with "ordering methodology", but in
the end the original wording prevailed. However, an action item was
recorded to discuss the meaning of "ordering semantics" on the list.

<P>3.2.3 When a client requests a listing of the members of a
collection, it can specify the ordering to be applied, and the server
will apply that ordering to its response.

<P>Agreed, with the addition that "The server may decline to support
the requested ordering".

<P>3.2.4 It is possible to order the members of a collection in an
arbitrary way, not necessarily based on property values.

<P>Agreed, with the word "arbitrary" changed to "client-specified".
One way we got into trouble here is that since the ordering might well
be stored in a property, it's hard to think of an ordering that is NOT
based on a property value.  Also, there was much sentiment that DASL
should support sorting on property values, and that orderings based on
property values alone should be left to DASL and not addressed here.

<P>There were some dissenting comments which noted that this feature
should be optional, and not required.  Also, some parts of a server
may not be able to support ordering.

<P>3.2.5 Internal and referential members may by intermixed in the
same ordering.

<P>Agreed.

<P>3.2.6 It is possible to impose multiple orderings on the same
collection.

<P>No agreement.  No one at the meeting was able to propose a scenario
that actually requires more than one ordering.  The scenario in the
requirements document was discredited, on the claim that the two
instructors should instead each create their own collections, using
referential members, and impose the ordering they wished.

<P>There was general agreement with a proposal to remove 3.2.6. As a
result of this change, 3.2.4 becomes a labeling issue, and there was
strong sentiment that 3.2.3 and 3.2.7 should be removed as well, since
this preserves a model where there are collections with preserved
order and DASL capability for sorting.  Furthermore, there was some
discussion about whether 3.2.8 should also be removed.

<P>3.2.7 An ordering is not required to contain all members of the
collection.

<P>No agreement, for the same reasons discussed in 3.2.6.

<P>3.2.8 A collection member may belong to the same ordering more than once.

<P>No agreement, for the same reasons discussed in 3.2.6.

<P>3.2.9 It is possible to modify an existing ordering efficiently.

<P>No agreement.  One participant noted that this seemed strange,
since it's like a "motherhood" statement.

<P>There was significant participant uncertainty from the discussion
of 3.2.6 until the end of the session.

<P>There was insufficient time to discuss the "Issues" from the
advanced collections requirements draft.

<P>*** Meeting Adjourned ***
</body>
</html>
