<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Minutes for WEBDAV WG Meeting at Memphis IETF</title>
  </head>

  <body>
      <h1>Minutes for WEBDAV WG Meeting at Memphis IETF</h1>

      <P>The WEBDAV Working Group held a meeting at the 38th IETF, in
      Memphis, TN, on April 7, 1997.  There were 49 people in
      attendance throughout the duration of the meeting.  The meeting
      was chaired by Jim Whitehead, and minutes were collected by Del
      Jensen.  These minutes are reported by Jim Whitehead due to the
      unavailability of Del Jensen for medical reasons.</P>

      <P>The meeting began with a poll of the audience to determine
      how many people in attendance were familiar with the WEBDAV WG.
      Since approximately on third of those in attendance were being
      exposed to WEBDAV for the first time, the session began with a
      brief overview presentation on WEBDAV.  This presentation was
      followed by a discussion, led by Judith Slein, on open issues in
      the requirements document.</P>

      <P>During these first two presentations, questions were asked
      about the scope of the WG's activities with respect to security,
      authentication, and access control.  The stated response, that
      WEBDAV was planning on using existing security and
      authentication schemes, but was not planning on implementing new
      schemes specifically for WEBDAV, met with some scepticism.
      Several parties expressed the opinion that distributed authoring
      in absence of good security, authentication, and access control
      was potentially dangerous, creating a hackers paradise.  Another
      participant stated that expressing the WEBDAV requirements for
      security, authentication and access control was a necessary
      first step, even if the WEBDAV WG does end up using existing
      schemes for this functionality.  One participant urged caution
      when considering these issues, stating that they were very
      complex (a.k.a. "pits of infinite depth"), while another viewed
      authentication and access control as server configuration
      issues, and hence out of scope for the WG.  At the end of the
      discussion, Judith Slein took an action item to bring up a
      thread on the discussion about security, authentication, and
      access control.</P>

      <P>Jim Whitehead next gave a presentation of several topics and
      preliminary proposals for their implementation, which were
      discussed in the Design Team meeting of April 1-4, 1997, held at
      U.C. Irvine, specifically locking, metadata, versioning, and
      partial write.  Discussion of locking centered on a description of
      the characteristics of a proposed lock method, which can be used
      to provide two types of lock semantics: an exclusive write lock,
      where only the principal who owns the lock may modify the state
      of the resource (body and metadata), and a shared write lock,
      where only the principal(s) who own/share the lock may modify
      the state of the resource.  There was some discussion about
      whether it should be possible to lock a deleted or non-existent
      resource in order to avoid a race condition between creating a
      resource (reserving its name) and then taking out a lock on the
      resource.  This led to the need to define a new requirement to
      make it possible to reserve a name in the namespace controlled
      by a server.</P>

      <P>Also discussed during locking was whether the proposed
      locking interface was sufficient for specifying a lock for
      replicated systems which employ a golden copy replication
      system.  While no counter examples were found by the
      participants, one asked about non-golden copy systems.  This
      raised the issue of whether locking capability should be a
      SHOULD requirement, rather than a MUST requirement, since
      non-golden copy replicated storage systems cannot implement a
      lock as defined.</P>

      <P>Metadata facilities were described in terms of a "mixed"
      model, where small chunk metadata is expressed using
      attribute-value pairs stored with a resource, using new methods
      GETMETA, PUTMETA, DELMETA, and large chunk metadata is expressed
      using a link on the described resource which points to another
      resource which contains the metadata description.  Referential
      integrity can be assured for small chunk metadata, but cannot be
      assured in the general case for large chunk metadata.</P>

      <P>A proposal for versioning was introduced where instead of
      using special checkout and checkin methods, versioning would be
      performed using the lock, unlock, and a new "save" method which
      would update the predecessor and successor relationships and
      store an updated resource.  A poll of participants found that
      they did not understand the new proposal well enough to tell
      whether it would work.</P>

      <P>The old patch method was resurrected in the proposal for
      partial write capability which was presented.  The notion of
      patch is that the body of the method request contains
      instructions for how to update the resource specified by the
      request URI.  It was recommended that multipart/byte-ranges be
      used as the default update instruction format which must be
      supported in the patch method is supported.  This choice was
      viewed as strange by some participants.  Other update formats
      suggested were VTML and Unix diff.</P>

      <P>*** End of meeting ***</P>

  </body>
</html>

