<!-- received="Thu Aug 22 15:25:00 1996 PDT" -->
<!-- sent="Thu, 22 Aug 1996 18:24:33 -0400" -->
<!-- name="Jim Whitehead" -->
<!-- email="ejw@ics.uci.edu" -->
<!-- subject="Current status" -->
<!-- id="ae428a5409021004bb29@[18.52.0.181]" -->
<!-- inreplyto="" -->
<title>Archive of Working Group on Versioning and Configuration Management of World Wide Web Content: Current status</title>
<h1>Current status</h1>
<b>Jim Whitehead</b> (<a href="mailto:ejw@ics.uci.edu"><i>ejw@ics.uci.edu</i></a>)<br>
<i>Thu, 22 Aug 1996 18:24:33 -0400</i>
<p>
<ul>
<li> <b>Messages sorted by:</b> <a href="index.html#108">[ date ]</a><a href="thread.html#108">[ thread ]</a><a href="subject.html#108">[ subject ]</a><a href="author.html#108">[ author ]</a>
<!-- next="start" -->
<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href="0109.html">Yaron Goland: "RE: Current status"</a>
<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href="0107.html">David G. Durand: "Re: Entity Tags"</a>
<!-- nextthread="start" -->
<!-- reply="end" -->
</ul>
<hr>
<!-- body="start" -->
<pre>
This message contains my current understanding of the status of this
working group.

I received an email yesterday from Larry Masinter, Chair of the HTTP
Working Group.  He stated that:

&gt;The deadline for 1.2 features was "two weeks after the Montreal
&gt;meeting", and then "August 1", but of course, the deadline has no
&gt;force, and new proposals can be entertained whenever. However, I'd
&gt;like to encourage you to go public sooner rather than wait until you
&gt;think you have it "right".

&gt;If you're not ready to circulate a specification of the actual
&gt;protocol changes, are you at least ready to circulate a specification
&gt;of the requirements that might lead to protocol changes?

I feel it is very important for this group to inform the HTTP 1.2 effort on
the requirements for versioning on the WWW.  As a result, there is one
current action item:

- Submit a document on requirements for the capabilities which should be
supported in versioning via HTTP.  Status: David Durand and Fabio Vitali
submitted to the list a draft requirements document.  David and I met today
to discuss this requirements document, the result of which a slightly
revised requirements document will be presented to this list early next
week, hopefully end-of-day Monday.  This document will be forwarded to the
HTTP WG at the end of next week, August 30.

Following the generation of a requirements document, it makes sense to also:

- Develop a document listing our proposal for implementing the capabilities
listed in the requirements document.  Whether these capabilities are
implemented in HTTP 1.2, or become an extension using PEP, it will be a
worthwhile exercise to develop this draft proposal.  My current
understanding of HTTP methods that might be proposed in this document are:
LOCK, UNLOCK, LINK, UNLINK, and possibly a FLAG method.  This document has
not yet been started.

- Jim Whitehead &lt;<a href="mailto:ejw@ics.uci.edu">ejw@ics.uci.edu</a>&gt;
</pre>
<!-- body="end" -->
<hr>
<p>
<ul>
<!-- next="start" -->
<li> <b>Next message:</b> <a href="0109.html">Yaron Goland: "RE: Current status"</a>
<li> <b>Previous message:</b> <a href="0107.html">David G. Durand: "Re: Entity Tags"</a>
<!-- nextthread="start" -->
<!-- reply="end" -->
</ul>

